

                  Sculpt as a Community Experience


We just released the fourth version of Sculpt OS today. It is subtitled
"Sculpt as a Community Experience". In this posting, I'd like to explain
what's behind this slogan.

When I drafted the four stages of the road map of Sculpt one and a half
years ago, I saw a vast design space in front of me. But the vision at
the horizon was actually pretty clear: I wanted Sculpt to become an operating
system that would scale beyond the limited capacities of our small company.
With dread and awe, I looked how established operating-systems projects like
the Linux kernel apparently master the coordination of a bee hive of
developers, and I knew that I would never be up the such a task. With the
goal of creating a sustainable OS, the only viable way forward would be
the radical decentralization of responsibility.

I believed that Genode's dynamic component architecture puts an opportunity in
front of me that does not exist anywhere else. In Genode, fundamentally,
components can cooperate without mutually trusting each other. Could that
premise be translated to the working of a developer community? If the system
works well without the assumption that all important components are ultimately
trustworthy, the user of the system does not need to trust each individual
component provider either. For example, let's imagine a developer of a new
wireless driver. In traditional OSes, such a driver has global reach within
the system. If it is vulnerable, the whole system becomes vulnerable. For this
reason, the driver developer must either be trustworthy, or the driver cannot
reasonably be considered to be included in the OS. With Genode, this friction
does not exist. The driver can see only the wireless card, and the wireless
firmware is considered as untrusted anyway. Regardless of any potential
malicious intent of the driver developer, the driver wouldn't be able to
access the disk, capture the screen, or sniff key strokes. The driver is
useful. We appreciate the developer's work. But we don't need to trust the
developer. Let's face it, in current-generation systems, we don't trust the
developers either. But we _have_ _to_ trust them.

The previous paragraph may have reminded you of academic fantasy from two
decades ago. But in the real world, two open questions remained unanswered.
First, how do the components end up at the computer of the user? And second,
how can the user control the interaction of the components with one another?
[https://genode.org/download/sculpt - Sculpt CE] provides answers to both
questions.

Discovery, sandboxed installation, integrity protection
-------------------------------------------------------

Every Sculpt system is equipped with a list of known software providers
accompanied with their public keys and their download locations. Note
that those providers don't need to be affiliated with Genode Labs. Also,
the list can of course be customized by the user. The content obtained from
each software provider resides in a distinct sub directory. The installation
procedure facilitates Genode's fine-grained sandboxing such that content
of one provider cannot interfere with the outside of its sub directory.
When installing software, no global system state is changed. There are
no install scripts whatsoever. The integrity of the content is protected
by cryptographic signatures. So once installed, the user knows that the
installed version corresponds bit-for-bit with the version as published by
the software provider.

[image sculpt_ce_selection]

Each software provider known to the Sculpt system, may publish a digitally
signed announcement of software packages. These so-called index files are
like a catalogue of software. Sculpt CE provides the GUI depicted above for
obtaining such catalogues, or to remove them. Once the index - the offering
of the software provider - is available, the user can browse the catalogue
and install components with a single click without fear. Once a package is
downloaded, the user gets presented a dialog like this:

[image sculpt_ce_noux_routing]

Here, the interplay of the new component with the rest of the system can
be defined at a _useful level of abstraction_. The user's decisions comprise a
whitelist of permissions. Since components can provide arbitrary services,
this dialog allows the user to wire up not just the component with the
underlying system but also with other components. The interplay between the
components can be revealed at any time by selecting a component in the
component graph:

[image sculpt_ce_noux_selected]

The graph morphs into a view of the trusted computing base (TCB) of the
selected component. All grayed-out components are outside the component's TCB
and therefore uncritical. This tool enables the user to assess the potential
reach of any deployed component. For example, the component selected above has
no connection to the network. _It is offline._


Where does it lead us?
----------------------

The possible implications may be quite far-reaching.

As an immediate consequence of Sculpt's new software-provisioning model,
the role of middlemen in-between the providers of software and the user - like
app stores or distributions - is questioned. Sculpt empowers both the
providers of software and the user, but independently from each other. A user
can install and use components even without trusting the component provider in
the first place because the interplay of each component with the rest of the
system is completely under the control of the user, not the applications.

The second - the most anticipated but also the most unclear - potential effect
is the friction-less scalability of the system and its developer community.
For the first time, developers outside of Genode Labs can easily contribute to
Sculpt OS, not only with new applications but with all kinds of typical
operating-systems functionality, too.

The third implication is the inherent protection of users against malware by
design. With each component subjected to the principle of least privilege,
there is no place for malware to hide and to execute (of course, disregarding
places that are outside the control of the operating system, like Intel ME).

As a fourth fascinating implication, the software-update treadmill that we
experience with all commodity operating system of today is not needed any
longer. Why would a user update a PDF viewer for security fixes when the PDF
viewer has no disk or network access anyway? The user can break free from
endless rhythm of system-global software updates!

