
                       Genode's Conscious C++ dialect



C++ is a power tool that scales from embedded systems to the most complex
software stacks imaginable. When we started Genode in 2006, the feature set of
the language was extremely persuasive. It strikes a great balance of giving
the programmer full control whenever needed while also featuring means of
expressing high-level software designs. This power is a two-edged sword
though. In this series of postings, I'd like to share how we learned to handle
it without regrets.


Two edges of the sword
----------------------

On the one edge, the versatility of C++ is staggering. A programmer is free to
express oneself via imperative programming, object-oriented programming,
functional programming, meta programming, and the combinations of these
paradigms! The industry-wide adoption is huge, thanks to the quality and
diversity of tooling (e.g., diverse compiler vendors), the careful language
standardization process, and the well-designed standard library.

On the other edge, C++ is widely criticised for its enormous complexity and
safety risks. It has become so complex that even father figures like Scott
Meyers
[http://scottmeyers.blogspot.com/2015/12/good-to-go.html - have thrown the towel].
The language's design seems to follow a principle of maximum risk. No risk, no
fun, right? So we can dance on the volcano to the tune of manual memory
management, integer overflows, implicit type conversions, implicitly called
constructors, out-of-bounds array accesses, and rhythms of undefined behavior.
The absence of an universally established coding-style convention and the
clinging to archaic legacies from the C stone age like the preprocessor and C
pointer arithmetics do not make the situation any better.

When looking from the sidelines, this dystopic picture suggests that C++ may
be a lost cause. So people understandably seek salvation in alternatives like
Rust. Instead of throwing the baby out with the bathwater, however, we went a
different route: Finding and tuning a custom C++ dialect that largely
mitigates the safety traps and - compared to contemporary C++ projects - feels
almost like a different language.

Genode's C++ dialect evolved primarily from an economic perspective.
Earlier in the project, when haunted by memory-corruption problems or sporadic
data-race conditions, operating-system development sometimes felt like the
misery of spending only a miniscule fraction of the day with creating new and
exciting things while 95 percent of the time went down the drain with the
question: _What the heck is going on?_
Worse, the most obnoxious bugs turned out to be shamefully mundane. Finding
such an issue did not felt like a victory but rather a defeat. A missing lock
guard, an off-by-one, a missing virtual destructor, an arithmetic overflow, or
an uninitialized variable - a tiny artifact left in a weak moment and
overlooked by reviewers - ensued sometimes days of hunting.

This got us thinking about systematic ways to cutting down these 95 percent.
Two aspects fueled our optimism: First, Genode is a green-field project with
no API below. So we are in the fairly unique position to make the rules! And
second, our developer team of a tight-knit group of less than 10 people is
small enough to agree on the same principles and conventions, and to follow
them rigorously. Over the years, a stringent and strongly opinionated dialect
of C++ evolved, which dramatically improved the situation.


Narrowing the scope to the operating-system level
-------------------------------------------------

Our dialect addresses operating-system (OS) code, not application code. These
are two different worlds.
Whereas application-level programmers are concerned about optimized code
paths, cache locality, a high variety of data structures and the ability to
swap them in-and-out, fine-tuned memory allocators, and convenience features,
OS code is rather boring in these respects.
With Genode's system-level code, we strive for minimizing complexity and
maximizing robustness. This contradicts with the common wisdom that such
low-level code must always be optimized for performance in the first place.
But think about it: The OS is just a bureaucratic apparatus
in-between the applications and the hardware. It doesn't do any meaningful
work in terms of computation.
It should be _designed_ to not stand in the way of the application's
performance. If the data structures within the OS became a bottleneck, the
software design would call for improvement, not the data structures.
This argument is especially true for a component-based system like Genode where
traditional OS functionalities like protocol parsers or cryptographic
functions are application-level concerns, hence lie outside the scope of our
C++ dialect.


Banning hidden state and hidden side effects
--------------------------------------------

Genode's C++ dialect deliberately starts at near-zero complexity.
There is neither a C runtime, nor any trace of the C++ standard library.
We start with the naked language.
There is no notion of a 'main' function, no implicit execution of
global constructors, and no way for anonymous memory allocations.
A tiny self-sufficient support library gives us support for exceptions and
runtime type information (RTTI).
The vocabulary of our dialect is then solely shaped by the self-sufficient
Genode API, which is small enough to be understood in its entirety by a single
developer.

In our dialect, a program is modelled as a state machine.
There is no 'main' function. Instead, the execution starts at a so-called
'Component::construct' function that takes an interface to the component's
environment ('env') as argument. The 'env' is the only way for the program
to produce side effects like I/O or inter-component communication.
The 'construct' function constructs a 'Main' object, forwarding the 'env'
as constructor argument. This object is the actual program.
To convey the mental model behind it: The program is _not_ viewed as
a _sequence of steps_ but rather viewed as an _object_ that is composed
out of its building blocks.
Once the 'construct' function returns, the program becomes
ready to respond to external events, i.e., incoming inter-component
communication (I/O).
In a way, the program's flow of control is turned upside down compared to the
traditional notion of a 'main' function.

As an immediate consequence, any code of the program is executed within
meaningful context. E.g., whenever a signal handler is invoked for the 'Main'
program, the handler is actually a method that can naturally access the
members of the 'Main' object. So the following rules become practical:

:No singletons: Whenever only a single instance of an object is needed,
  it can be hosted as a member of the 'Main' object.

:No global variables: There is always a natural context where
  the state can reside.

:No blocking I/O calls: Instead of blocking for I/O, the component becomes
  receptive for I/O whenever returning to its idle state.
  With no blocking calls, there is no hidden state on the stack while
  blocking.

:No thread-local storage: The context of any flow of execution is always
  the surrounding object ('Main' object or a 'Thread' object).

:No global constructors needed: The program is explicitly constructed
  as the 'Main' object.

:No anonymous memory allocations: There exists no default 'new' operator.

Unless the 'env' (or parts thereof) is presented to a sub program,
a sub program cannot have any side effects to the outside world.
In particular, no I/O or dynamic memory allocation is possible in the sub
program. Side effects can only be triggered with the explicit consent of the
calling code by passing a corresponding interface to the sub program.


Static compositions, RAII, and exceptions are our friends
---------------------------------------------------------

Genode's C++ dialect promotes the static composition of objects from
other objects, with the 'Main' object being the top level of a hierarchy.
Code that is traditionally expressed as a sequence of statements
is instead expressed as a sequence of class members.
By composing the program as a hierarchy of aggregated members,
the handling of errors becomes robust. Errors are exceptions that happen at
construction time. Thanks to the RAII technique of C++, already constructed
members of a partially constructed object are always orderly destructed.
There are clear-cut transactional semantics. Either the object could be
constructed successfully, or not at all. In both cases, the program
eventually enters a consistent state.

The so-called 'Reconstructible' pattern provides a way to reconstruct parts
of the program while maintaining the program's static memory layout.

All data types are intrusive. That means that meta data is not
allocated separately from the managed objects but stored within
the respective objects. Containers, strings, and even Genode's XML
generator and XML parser don't perform any dynamic memory allocations.

In cases where dynamic memory allocations are unavoidable, an allocator
(e.g., a heap) must be explicitly created with the required 'env' resources as
an ingredient.
Since memory allocations are deliberate and rare operations,
the dialect fosters a strong sense of ownership over such dynamic allocations.
Dynamically allocated objects are usually owned (remembered) by the allocating
context.
References to such objects never leave the scope of the owner.
Whenever an allocated objected must be accessed from outside the owner, lambda
functions are used as resource monitors.


There is much more to come...
-----------------------------

This posting is meant to kick off a series of short articles, highlighting
many different aspects of Genode's concious C++ dialect, ranging from stylistic
considerations, over the avoidance of many C++ traps, to data-structure design.
Stay tuned.

To get a taste of how the dialect looks in practice, consider examining the
code of the
[https://github.com/genodelabs/genode/tree/master/repos/gems/src/app/fs_query - fs_query]
component. With about 160 source lines (sloccount), it is reasonably small
while doing meaningful work.

